[docs] Add oauth token authentication workflow (#2655)
superseriousbusiness/gotosocial: docs/api/authentication.md

# Authentication with the API

> GoToSocial implements an API that is compatible with the Mastodon API which means that most everything to do with the API follows many of the conventions and techniques that work for the Mastodon API. That includes authentication.

Reviewer: I would suggest moving this to either the `swagger.md`, as that's the introduction page for the API section, or dropping it. It's generally understood that alternative implementations provide a Mastodon-compatible Client API.

Reviewer: If you want to keep an intro paragraph, I would go with something like "Using the client API requires authentication. This page documents the general flow for retrieving an authentication token with examples for doing this on the CLI".

Author: done. i hope it's ok to use your suggestion as is for this. i did want some kind of intro paragraph, but i wrote it independently in obsidian and copied it directly into a new file, which is how i got that somewhat redundant paragraph.

Find below the steps used to authenticate with the GoToSocial API.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The headers already create separate sections, we don't really need additional horizontal lines here.

## Create a new application

> We need to get a new key:pair for our application. This is done by making a `POST` request to the `/api/v1/apps` endpoint. Replace `your_app_name` in the code below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to get a new key pair for our application. This is done by making a `POST` request to the `/api/v1/apps` endpoint. Replace `your_app_name` in the code below:
```

```
curl -X POST 'https://your.instance.url/api/v1/apps' -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -d '{
  "client_name": your_app_name,

>   "redirect_uris": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",

Reviewer: I would add an explanation after this code sample for why `urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob` specifically.

Author: to be honest, i had to go searching for what it means because *i* didn't know what it meant.

  "scopes": "read"
}'

```

Note that `scopes` can be one of:
- read
- write
- follow
- push
- admin

!!! warning
    Be **very** careful what scopes you grant to your application.
    The default is `read` if `scopes` is not set.

> A successful call returns a response with a client_id and client_secret that we are going need to use in the rest of the process. It looks something like this: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successful call returns a response with a `client_id` and `client_secret` that we are going need to use in the rest of the process. It looks something like this: 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

{
  "id": randomised_id,
  "name": your_app_name,
  "redirect_uri": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",
  "client_id": your_new_client_id,
  "client_secret": your_new_client_secret
}
```

> !!! important

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! tip
```

`important` isn't a recognised admonition, so it renders just like Note. I think `tip` is suitable here instead.

>     Ensure you save the client_id and client_secret somewhere so you can refer to it as we go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ensure you save the `client_id` and `client_secret` somewhere so you can refer to it as we go.
```

> ## authorizing your application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Authorizing your application
```

> We've registered a new application with GoToSocial, but it isn't connected to your account just yet. Now we need to tell GoToSocial that that new application is actually going to interact as you. To do this, we need to authenticate with your instance via a browser to process the login and permission granting process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've registered a new application with GoToSocial, but it isn't connected to your account just yet. Now we need to tell GoToSocial that that new application is actually going to act on your behalf. To do this, we need to authenticate with your instance via a browser to initiate the login and permission granting process.
```

Using the `client_id` from the previous step, create a URL with a query string like so:
```
https://your.instance.url/oauth/authorize?client_id=your_new_client_id-id&redirect_uri=urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob&response_type=code
```

You'll get a login form to your instance and be prompted to login if you aren't already logged in. Once logged in, you will get a screen that says something like this:

> !!! note

Reviewer: I would change this to a code block. Admonitions are for callouts or separate calls to action. I wouldn't use them to display the response of and endpoint or result of an action.

Author: maybe use a quote block instead?

    Hi `your_username`!
 
    Application `your_app_name` would like to perform actions on your behalf, with scope *`read`*.
    The application will redirect to urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob to continue.
 
    <span style="padding:12px;background-color:#66befe;color:black;">Allow</span>
 

Once you click `Allow`, you will get a window that looks something like this:

> !!! note

Reviewer: Idem here, this should be a code block.

    Here's your out-of-band token with scope "read", use it wisely:
     WBANQAXXHDN9KJQZXGWNQANA4V9EJWMUDHVCUUM3JHYAB3DP

## Getting your token
The next step is to send a `POST` request to the oauth/token endpoint to get an access token that you will use to authenticate your future requests. 
```
curl -X POST 'https://your.instance.url/oauth/token' -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -d '{
  "redirect_uri": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",
  "client_id": "your_new_client_id",
  "client_secret": "your_new_client_secret",
  "grant_type": "authorization_code",
  "code": "WBANQAXXHDN9KJQZXGWNQANA4V9EJWMUDHVCUUM3JHYAB3DP"
}' 
```
!!! warning
    Please note that the characters used above are just a random selection of characters and cannot be used.
    ake sure you replace it with the code *you* get from your instance.

You'll get a response that includes your access token and looks something like this:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

Author: question: would it be helpful to use ```bash for the curl lines?

{
  "access_token": "your_brand_new_access_token",
  "created_at": unixtimestamp,
  "scope": "read",
  "token_type": "Bearer"
}
```
## Verifying it all

> To make sure everything went through successfully, target the `/api/v1/verify_credentials` endpoint, adding your new access token to the Header as `Authentication:Bearer your_brand_new_token`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure everything went through successfully, query the `/api/v1/verify_credentials` endpoint, adding your new access token to the Header as `Authorization: Bearer your_brand_new_token`.
```

# Authentication with the API

Using the client API requires authentication. This page documents the general flow for retrieving an authentication token with examples for doing this on the CLI

## Create a new application

We need to register a new application, which we can then use to request an OAuth token. This is done by making a `POST` request to the `/api/v1/apps` endpoint. Replace `your_app_name` in the code below:

```bash
curl -X POST 'https://your.instance.url/api/v1/apps' \ 
  -H 'Content-Type:application/json' \
  -d '{
      "client_name": "your_app_name",
      "redirect_uris": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",
      "scopes": "read"
    }'
```

The string "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob" is an indication of what is known as out-of-band authentication - a technique used in multi-factor authentication to reduce the number of ways that a bad actor can intrude on the authentication process. In this instance, it allows us to view and manually copy the tokens created to use further in this process.

Note that `scopes` can be any space-separated combination of:

- read
- write
- follow

> - push

Reviewer 2: I can sort of guess what the scopes read, write, follow and admin do, but push not so much. Maybe add a description of the scopes as relating to GtS or (maybe better) link to one?

Author: Funnily, I copied that directly from the mastodon docs assuming the API is implemented in whole. My mistake. To your specific point: I have no idea how one would implement "push" permission. From the mastodon docs:

> Grants access to [Web Push API subscriptions.](https://docs.joinmastodon.org/methods/push/) Added in Mastodon 2.4.0.

Do we even have that feature/facility/functionality in Gts?

Re-reading the docs, it also seems as if follow is depreacted in favour of "child permissions" instead (read:follows, write:follows, etc.). So I will remove that on next commit as well.

Reviewer 2: Probably best to align here with what GtS supports, and possibly indicate what was added in which GtS version starting from when it becomes beta or so.

Reviewer 3: Description of what scopes do is not in scope for this PR, which is just about how to go through the authorization flow to get a token. And token scopes are not implemented yet anyway, as mentioned in the warning box below. Once they are, we can revisit this bit of the docs and add appropriate links. So I think this is fine for now :)

Author: Which makes me think I should remove "follow and "push" since they are outdated in home mastodon anyway? And leave the rest as is?

Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: > I should remove "follow and "push"

Mmm. I thought about it a bit more; we probably could just replace all this stuff about scopes with something like:

```
!!! warning
   GoToSocial does not currently support scoped authorization tokens, so any token you obtain in this process will be able to perform all actions on your behalf. Nevertheless, it is always good practice to grant your application the lowest tier permissions it needs to do its job. e.g. If your application won't be making posts, use scope=read.
   
   In this spirit, "read" is used in the example above, which means that in the future when scoped tokens are supported, the application will be restricted to only being able to do "read" actions.
   
   You can read more about additional planned OAuth security features [right here](https://github.com/superseriousbusiness/gotosocial/issues/2232).
```

Then we're really not giving any false impressions that we support scoped tokens yet. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: That, but perhaps mention explicitly that that includes administrative access as well if the token is for an admin account. (I thought a read/write token would explicitly not do that but…)

Reviewer 3: Edited the above to mention that ^

Author: Alrighty. Apologies for only getting to this now. For some reason notifications stopped coming through either in email or in the app. Applied that change to the warning immediately following the scopes discussion and removed push/follow from the list.

Reviewer 3: > Apologies for only getting to this now.

No problem at all, nothing to apologize for :)

    Make sure you replace it with the code *you* get from your instance.

You'll get a response that includes your access token and looks something like this:
```json
{
  "access_token": "your_brand_new_access_token",
  "created_at": unixtimestamp,
  "scope": "read",
  "token_type": "Bearer"
}
```
## Verifying it all
To make sure everything went through successfully, query the `/api/v1/verify_credentials` endpoint, adding your new access token to the Header as `Authorization: Bearer your_brand_new_token`.

See this example:
```bash
curl -X GET 'https://your.instance.url/api/v1/accounts/verify_credentials' \
  -H 'Content-Type:application/json' 
  -H 'Authorization:Bearer your_brand_new_token'
```
If all goes well, you should get your user profile as a response response.

## Final notes
Thereafter, whenever you make an api call, say to query your notifications, add a Header to your request `Authorization:Bearer your_brand_new_token` like this:
```bash
curl --request GET \
  --url https://your.instance.url/api/v1/notifications \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer your_brand_new_token' \
```

> 

Reviewer 2: OK, good point.

Is there an API to remove apps yet?

> 

Author: I have used tinysubversions before for my akkoma install but I agree that that should be an individual decision to use so that we don't expose ourselves as a project.

# Authentication with the API

Using the client API requires authentication. This page documents the general flow for retrieving an authentication token with examples for doing this on the CLI

## Create a new application

> We need to get a new key pair for our application. This is done by making a `POST` request to the `/api/v1/apps` endpoint. Replace `your_app_name` in the code below:

Reviewer 3: Key pair is a bit confusing here because it suggests that cryptography is involved somehow. I'd just say something like:

```suggestion
We need to register a new application, which we can then use to request an OAuth token. This is done by making a `POST` request to the `/api/v1/apps` endpoint. Replace `your_app_name` in the code below:
```

```bash
curl -X POST 'https://your.instance.url/api/v1/apps' \ 
  -H 'Content-Type:application/json' \
  -d '{

>       "client_name": your_app_name,

Reviewer 3: I'd wrap this as a string as well so that callers don't try to provide it as a bare value.

```suggestion
      "client_name": "your_app_name",
```

      "redirect_uris": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",
      "scopes": "read"
    }'
```

The string "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob" is an indication of what is known as out-of-band authentication - a technique used in multi-factor authentication to reduce the number of ways that a bad actor can intrude on the authentication process. In this instance, it allows us to view and manually copy the tokens created to use further in this process.

Note that `scopes` can be any space-separated combination of:

- read
- write
- follow
- push
- admin

!!! warning

>     Be **very** careful what scopes you grant to your application.

Reviewer 3: To avoid lulling people into a false sense of security, I think it would be a good idea to add a note here that GoToSocial does not currently support proper scopes on tokens. This is something we still need to add during the beta phase (this year).

Author: So, something along the lines of:

"While GoToSocial does not currently support properly scoped tokens, it is still good practice to grant your application the lowest level permissions it needs to do its job. e.g. if your application won't be making posts, limit it to scope=read."

```

Once you click `Allow`, you will get a window that looks something like this:

```
Here's your out-of-band token with scope "read", use it wisely:
WBANQAXXHDN9KJQZXGWNQANA4V9EJWMUDHVCUUM3JHYAB3DP
```

## Getting your token
The next step is to send a `POST` request to the oauth/token endpoint to get an access token that you will use to authenticate your future requests. 
```bash
curl -X POST 'https://your.instance.url/oauth/token' \
  -H 'Content-Type:application/json' 
  -d '{
      "redirect_uri": "urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob",
      "client_id": "your_new_client_id",
      "client_secret": "your_new_client_secret",
      "grant_type": "authorization_code",
      "code": "WBANQAXXHDN9KJQZXGWNQANA4V9EJWMUDHVCUUM3JHYAB3DP"
    }' 
```
!!! warning
    Please note that the characters used above are just a random selection of characters and cannot be used.
    Make sure you replace it with the code *you* get from your instance.

You'll get a response that includes your access token and looks something like this:
```json
{
  "access_token": "your_brand_new_access_token",
  "created_at": unixtimestamp,
  "scope": "read",
  "token_type": "Bearer"
}
```
## Verifying it all

> To make sure everything went through successfully, query the `/api/v1/verify_credentials` endpoint, adding your new access token to the Header as `Authentication: Bearer your_brand_new_token`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure everything went through successfully, query the `/api/v1/verify_credentials` endpoint, adding your new access token to the Header as `Authorization: Bearer your_brand_new_token`.
```
